From jthaler.net/join, September 2026.
Joining My Group - Jesse Thaler
Joining My Group
Each year, I typically have a few openings in my group for new researchers. Please read the sections below carefully, since there are different steps to take depending on your career stage.
Current Research Group
Postdocs
With its huge breadth of research opportunities across theoretical particle physics, nuclear physics, and quantum information, the MIT Center for Theoretical Physics - a Leinweber Institute (CTP-LI) is a great place to do postdoctoral research in the MIT Physics Department. For researchers working at the intersection of physics and AI, there are also opportunities to engage with the NSF Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions (IAIFI) and the MIT Schwarzman College of Computing (SCC).
CTP-LI Postdocs Applications for CTP-LI Postdocs are typically due mid-November. The new Leinweber Physics Postdoctoral Fellowship also requires a nomination due early November.
Pappalardo Fellowship Nominations for the MIT Physics Pappalardo Fellowship are typically due in early September.
IAIFI Fellowship Applications for the IAIFI Fellowship are typically due in mid-October.
Tayebati Fellowship Applications for the SCC Tayebati Fellowship are typically due in early December.
N.B.: The selection process for these positions are independent, so make sure to apply to all positions that you might be interested in taking. Also, some of these positions require you to select a potential mentor from a drop-down list, otherwise your application will be considered incomplete, so don’t forget that step in the process. For most internal postdocs, you do not need to contact me in advance to confirm my willingness to be a mentor, unless the application specifically requires a statement/letter of support.
There are also ways to join the CTP-LI as a postdoc through external funding. Examples include the SNSF Postdoc.Mobility Fellowship and the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions Fellowship. External fellowships require significant advanced notice to process from the MIT side, so reach out well before the application deadline.
Research Inquiry Form If you are have or are pursuing an External Funding opportunity, please use this form to indicate your interest.
Ph.D. Students
I anticipate at least one opening for a Ph.D. student in my research group in the coming years. I am particularly interested in supervising students in the MIT Interdisciplinary Doctoral Program in Statistics (IDPS), though I am open to working on all aspects of physics in and beyond the standard model.
Current MIT Ph.D. Students
Research Inquiry Form Current MIT Ph.D. students should fill out this form to indicate your interest.
Visiting Ph.D. Students
Research Inquiry Form If you are have or are pursuing an External Funding opportunity, please use this form to indicate your interest.
Visiting PhD students must have full financial support to visit MIT. Self-funded visits are not possible, and I currently do not have funds to support visiting students.
Propspective MIT Ph.D. Students
MIT Physics Ph.D. Program Applications for prospective MIT Ph.D. students are due in mid-December.
I cannot provide any specific information about the admissions process. Out of fairness to other applicants, I do not meet with prospective students in advance of their application, nor do I give individual application advice.
As a general recommendation, you are encouraged to mention potential mentors in your research statement, so if you are interested in working with me, make sure that is clear in your application.
Research Inquiry Form You can alert me to your application by filling out this form, though I will typically not respond. Filling out this form is entirely optional; your official application is all that matters for admission.
If you are admitted, I would be delighted to talk to you about research opportunities in my group at the Physics Graduate Open House event typically held in early April.
MIT does not have a separate Master’s program in Physics, so you should apply to the Ph.D. program.
As mentioned above, I anticipate having at least one opening in my reseach group in the coming years. I do not have specific research projects in mind for future students. I expect my students to choose the research path that aligns best with their own interests.
M.Eng. Students
MIT EECS MEng Program I sometimes work with Master’s students through the MIT EECS M.Eng. program. This program is open to current MIT undergradates in courses 6-1, 6-2, 6-3, 6-4, 6-7, and 6-14. In most cases, I cannot support M.Eng. students on an RA, so you would have to secure a TA appointment.
Currently, I am not conducting research with Master’s students from other universities. Students interested in pursuing Master’s research with me should consider applying to the MIT Physics Ph.D. program instead.
Undergraduates
To do meaningful research in theoretical particle physics at the undergraduate level, you must have taken at least a course on Relativity (8.033) and a full year of Quantum Mechanics (8.05/8.06). I often work with students who have been exposed to some graduate-level courses at MIT, though there are also research projects available for students with extensive programming experience.
Current MIT Undergraduate Students
Research Inquiry Form Current MIT B.S. students should fill out this form to indicate your interest.
MIT UROP Most of my undergraduates get funding through the MIT Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program.
Visiting Undergraduate Students
MIT MSRP The primary way that I work with summer undergraduate interns from other universities is through the MIT Summer Research Program.
Research Inquiry Form If you are have or are pursuing an External Funding opportunity, please use this form to indicate your interest.
Visiting undergraduate students must have full financial support to visit MIT. Self-funded visits are not possible, and I currently do not have funds to support visiting students.
High Schoolers
Summer Programs This is a list of recommended summer programs for high school students from the MIT Admissions Office.
Currently, I am not conducting research with high school students.
Other Opportunities
Ask Jesse a Question! If you are in a situation that isn’t addressed above, please send me a question.
