From jthaler.net/news, September 2026.
In the News - Jesse Thaler
In the News
Press coverage and updates related to me and my research group. Last updated: September 20, 2026
Recent News Articles
Press Information
News Archive
Press coverage in the past 24 months:
“Jesse Thaler named director of the Laboratory for Nuclear Science”
MIT News, July 2026
I’m excited to bring LNS into the next wave of discoveries supported by AI-driven capabilities.
“NSF renews support for MIT-led AI and physics institute, expanding a new model for discovery”
MIT News, June 2026
From the beginning, IAIFI has been built around a two-way street: AI enabling better physics, and physics enabling better AI.
“Boston University Joins National Science Foundation Institute Pushing Frontiers of Physics and AI”
The Brink (BU News), June 2026
We’re excited to see Boston University play an important role in IAIFI, adding real intellectual strength and reinforcing the collaborative model that has been central to the institute from the start.
“3 Questions: On the future of AI and the mathematical and physical sciences”
MIT News, March 2026
The virtuous cycle of AI and science has the potential to be truly transformative — offering deeper insight into AI, accelerating scientific discovery, and producing robust tools for both.
“Our elegant universe: rethinking nature’s deepest principle”
New Scientist, January 2026
By definition, the theory that matches experiment is beautiful.
“Inside the wild experiments physicists would do with zero limits: A muon collider”
New Scientist, December 2025
Audacity has often fuelled progress in my field of particle physics.
“AI for Physics Discovery”
Discovery Engines (with Nabil Laoudji), August 2025
And now there are things that I can’t unsee.
“Review: Machine Learning in Quantum Sciences”
Cambridge University Press, June 2025
Imagine trying to do cutting-edge research in the quantum sciences without knowing artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML).
“Distinguishing Between Type I & Type II Fun”
Brown Physics, May 2025
Jazz and physics (and insomnia) are my favorite things!
“How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love AI”
Science@MIT, December 2024
Deep learning is all the more powerful when combined with deep thinking.
“Researchers Explore Mutual Benefits of AI and Science”
Science@MIT, December 2024
If one can express scientific problems in the abstract language of computation, one can blur the boundaries between disciplines and leverage AI advances to tackle problems across both AI and science.
“In conversation: Jesse Thaler”
FirstPrinciples, November 2024
The off-the-shelf AI doesn’t really operate in a way that we can use for scientific discovery. But it’s close. And we can have a nice synergy with the computer science community to drive discovery in both fields.
“Physics, AI, and the future of discovery”
Physics Today, November 2024
I’m holding on for dear life as my junior colleagues drag me deeper and deeper into this world that I so distrusted at first.
Recent Papers
All Papers by Year
All Papers by Topic
Papers posted to the arXiv from the past 12 months:
Simplex Demixing: Disentangling Multiple Light-Flavor Jets at Colliders
Gregorio de la Fuente and Jesse Thaler, arXiv 2026
The Well-Tempered Likelihood: Honest Confidence Intervals for Misspecified Models
Benjamin Nachman and Jesse Thaler, arXiv 2026
Interpreting ‘Interpretability’ and Explaining ‘Explainability’ in Machine Learning in Physics
Rikab Gambhir, Luisa Lucie-Smith, and Jesse Thaler, arXiv 2026
Reweighting Adversarial Networks for Unbinned Unfolding
Umar Sohail Qureshi, Krish Desai, Jesse Thaler, and Benjamin Nachman, arXiv 2026
Many Wrongs Make a Right: Leveraging Biased Simulations Towards Unbiased Parameter Inference
Ezequiel Alvarez, Sean Benevedes, Manuel Szewc, and Jesse Thaler, arXiv 2026
Sven: Singular Value Descent as a Computationally Efficient Natural Gradient Method
Samuel Bright-Thonney, Thomas R. Harvey, Andre Lukas, and Jesse Thaler, arXiv 2026
Descending into the Modular Bootstrap
Nathan Benjamin, A. Liam Fitzpatrick, Wei Li, and Jesse Thaler, JHEP 2026
Improving Parton Shower Predictions via Precision Moments of Energy Flow Polynomials
Benoît Assi, Kyle Lee, and Jesse Thaler, JHEP 2026
The Future of Artificial Intelligence and the Mathematical and Physical Sciences (AI+MPS)
Andrew Ferguson, Marisa LaFleur, Lars Ruthotto, Jesse Thaler, Yuan-Sen Ting, Pratyush Tiwary, Soledad Villar, et al., MLST 2026
Recent/Upcoming Events
All Presentations
Talks and panels from the past 12 months:
“Centaur Science: Adventures in AI+Physics”,
School on Machine Learning and AI Methods at the LHC,
Karachi, Pakistan, July 2026 virtual
“Centaur Science: Adventures in AI+Physics”,
Seminar,
IRFU, July 2026
“Descending into the Modular Bootstrap”,
ENS Summer Institute,
École Normale Supérieure, June 2026
“Machine Learning through the Lens of Physics” (“Ingredients for ML”, “Optimal Transport”),
Learning at the Frontier: Advanced School on Machine Learning for Particle Physics,
AIPHY, June 2026
“Centaur Science: Adventures in AI+Physics”,
PEPR IA Days,
Rennes, June 2026
“Centaur Science: Adventures in AI+Physics”,
Quantum Universe II Kick-Off Keynote,
Planetarium Hamburg, June 2026
“Descending into the Modular Bootstrap”,
Talks Series,
FirstPrinciples, June 2026 virtual
“QCD Theory meets Information Theory”,
Seminar,
LPNHE, Paris, June 2026
“Descending into the Modular Bootstrap”,
Seminar,
IHES, May 2026
“Machine Learning and New Methodologies in HEP”,
Large Hadron Collider Physics Conference (LHCP 2026),
Paris, May 2026
“Centaur Science: Adventures in AI+Physics”,
Physics Colloquium,
U. Genova, May 2026
“Descending into the Modular Bootstrap”,
ML4HEP Seminar,
Annecy-Geneva-Lausanne, May 2026 virtual
“Centaur Science: Adventures in AI+Physics”,
DataIA Seminar,
Université Paris-Saclay, May 2026
“Descending into the Modular Bootstrap”,
Theoretical Physics Colloquium,
U. Oxford, May 2026
“Descending into the Modular Bootstrap”,
DAMTP Colloquium,
U. Cambridge, April 2026
“Centaur Science: Adventures in AI+Physics”,
Hans Jensen Lecture,
Heidelberg U., April 2026
“Predictably Uncertain: Academic Publishing in the Era of AI”,
Virtual Salon,
Annual Reviews, March 2026 virtual
“Centaur Science: Adventures in AI+Physics”,
Physics Colloquium,
U. Geneva, March 2026
“Centaur Science: Adventures in AI+Physics”,
AI4Science Launch Event,
Sorbonne Center for Artificial Intelligence, March 2026
“Centaur Science: Adventures in AI+Physics”,
Colloquium,
CERN, February 2026
“The Future of Artificial Intelligence and the Mathematical and Physical Sciences”,
Astronomy & Astrophysics Advisory Committee,
NSF/NASA/DOE, January 2026 virtual
“Deep Learning + Deep Thinking = Deeper Understanding”,
Spritz of Science,
Il Conventino Firenze, January 2026
“Machine Learning for Fundamental Physics” (“The Rise of Centaur Science”, “Machine Learning through the Lens of Physics”, “Frequent(ist)ly Asked Questions”, “Jets in Space”, “The Future of AI+Physics”),
Lectures on the Theory of Fundamental Interactions,
GGI, Florence, January 2026
“Centaur Science: Particle Physics meets Machine Learning”,
Colloquium,
NIKHEF, December 2025
“QCD Theory meets Information Theory”,
Séminaire Général,
IPhT Saclay, December 2025
“Deep Learning + Deep Thinking = Deeper Understanding”,
Chaire Georges Lemaître Public Lecture,
Université catholique de Louvain, November 2025
“Centaur Science: Particle Physics meets Machine Learning” (“Case Studies in Centaur Science”, “Machine Learning through the Lens of Physics”, “Frequent(ist)ly Asked Questions”, “Jets in Space”, “The Future of AI+Physics”),
Chaire Georges Lemaître Lectures,
Université catholique de Louvain, November 2025
“The Future of Artificial Intelligence and the Mathematical and Physical Sciences”,
AI/ML Science and Technology Interest Group,
NASA Cosmic Origins Program, November 2025 virtual
News Archive
Profiles and Highlights
“Jesse Thaler named director of the Laboratory for Nuclear Science”
MIT News, July 2026
I’m excited to bring LNS into the next wave of discoveries supported by AI-driven capabilities.
“NSF renews support for MIT-led AI and physics institute, expanding a new model for discovery”
MIT News, June 2026
From the beginning, IAIFI has been built around a two-way street: AI enabling better physics, and physics enabling better AI.
“3 Questions: On the future of AI and the mathematical and physical sciences”
MIT News, March 2026
The virtuous cycle of AI and science has the potential to be truly transformative — offering deeper insight into AI, accelerating scientific discovery, and producing robust tools for both.
“AI for Physics Discovery”
Discovery Engines (with Nabil Laoudji), August 2025
And now there are things that I can’t unsee.
“Distinguishing Between Type I & Type II Fun”
Brown Physics, May 2025
Jazz and physics (and insomnia) are my favorite things!
“How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love AI”
Science@MIT, December 2024
Deep learning is all the more powerful when combined with deep thinking.
“In conversation: Jesse Thaler”
FirstPrinciples, November 2024
The off-the-shelf AI doesn’t really operate in a way that we can use for scientific discovery. But it’s close. And we can have a nice synergy with the computer science community to drive discovery in both fields.
“Faces of CISE: Jesse Thaler, Ph.D.”
NSF CISE Newsletter, May 2024
“Jesse Thaler: Then and Now / 2011 Early Career Award Winner”
DOE News, December 2021
“Using AI to Drill Down in Physics”
ACM News, July 2021
“Can a Computer Devise a Theory of Everything?”
New York Times, November 2020
“NSF advances artificial intelligence research with new nationwide institutes”
NSF News, August 2020
“National Science Foundation awards $20M to launch artificial-intelligence institute”
Harvard Gazette, August 2020
“National Science Foundation announces MIT-led Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions”
MIT News, August 2020
“A new metric to capture the similarity between collider events”
Phys.org, August 2019
“MIT physicists: Social networks could hold the key to finding new particles”
Ars Technica, July 2019
“Seeking new physics, scientists borrow from social networks”
MIT News, July 2019
“Miracles when you use the right metric”
Collider Blog, February 2019
“A Fresh Look at Quark-Gluon Plasma Soup”
AIP Inside Science, July 2018
“Center for Theoretical Physics celebrates 50 years”
MIT News, March 2018
“Jesse Thaler: Seeking the fundamental nature of matter”
MIT News, November 2017
“Chalkboard theorist”
MIT Spotlight, November 2017
“First open-access data from large collider confirm subatomic particle patterns”
MIT Newsletter, September 2017
“Team simulates a magnetar to seek dark matter particle”
MIT Newsletter, October 2016
“Miller Fellow Focus: Jesse Thaler”
Miller Institute Newsletter, September 2007
Awards and Honors
APS Fellow: “Seven from MIT named American Physical Society Fellows for 2022”
MIT News, October 2022
Simons Investigator: “Three MIT faculty members named 2022 Simons Investigators”
MIT News, June 2022
DOE QuantISED: “Center for Theoretical Physics professors earn DOE Quantum Information Science Awards”
MIT News, October 2018
Promotion: “School of Science professors granted tenure”
MIT News, June 2017
Edgerton Award: “Biobarrier explorer and dark matter theorist win MIT’s prestigious junior faculty award”
MIT News, April 2016
Sloan Fellowship: “Six MIT researchers win Sloan Research Fellowships”
MIT News, February 2013
PECASE Award: “Five MIT researchers win presidential early career honors”
MIT News, July 2012
DOE Early Career Award: “Five from MIT receive DoE early career research grants”
MIT News, June 2011
Quotations and Perspectives
“Boston University Joins National Science Foundation Institute Pushing Frontiers of Physics and AI”
The Brink (BU News), June 2026
We’re excited to see Boston University play an important role in IAIFI, adding real intellectual strength and reinforcing the collaborative model that has been central to the institute from the start.
“Our elegant universe: rethinking nature’s deepest principle”
New Scientist, January 2026
By definition, the theory that matches experiment is beautiful.
“Inside the wild experiments physicists would do with zero limits: A muon collider”
New Scientist, December 2025
Audacity has often fuelled progress in my field of particle physics.
“Review: Machine Learning in Quantum Sciences”
Cambridge University Press, June 2025
Imagine trying to do cutting-edge research in the quantum sciences without knowing artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML).
“Researchers Explore Mutual Benefits of AI and Science”
Science@MIT, December 2024
If one can express scientific problems in the abstract language of computation, one can blur the boundaries between disciplines and leverage AI advances to tackle problems across both AI and science.
“Physics, AI, and the future of discovery”
Physics Today, November 2024
I’m holding on for dear life as my junior colleagues drag me deeper and deeper into this world that I so distrusted at first.
“Machine learning and theory”
Symmetry Magazine, April 2024
To actually phrase some of the aspects of the scientific process in rigorous, algorithmic terms such that a computer could do it — that itself is a rich scientific endeavor, and one that has a chance of really accelerating the way that we do scientific discovery.
“MIT faculty, instructors, students experiment with generative AI in teaching and learning”
MIT News, April 2024
You have power to change the behavior of those tools.
“Scientists design program for the future of US particle physics research”
Symmetry Magazine, December 2023
Particle physics is global science. No matter what, there is no country that can afford the next collider by themselves.
“From physics to generative AI: An AI model for advanced pattern generation”
MIT News, September 2023
I’m thrilled to see the myriad of ways ‘physics intelligence’ is transforming the field of artificial intelligence.
“Will artificial intelligence ever discover new laws of physics?”
New Scientist, November 2022
I was trained to think about what are the laws of nature in our universe. Now it’s ‘what is the space of all possible rules?’
“Machine Learning Shaking Up Hard Sciences, Too”
IEEE Spectrum, October 2022
We’d like to have a machine learn to think more like a physicist, but we also just need to learn how to think a little bit more like a machine.
“A Hint of Dark Matter Sends Physicists Looking to the Skies”
Quanta Magazine, October 2021
“Advancing AI theory with a first-principles understanding of deep neural networks”
Facebook AI, June 2021
“Quantum computer captures physics of high-energy particles”
Physics World, February 2021
While some aspects of particle scattering can be described in a classical language, nature is fundamentally quantum mechanical.
“Faculty discuss Flexible P/NR policy”
The Tech, March 2020
Our goal was to come up with a grading policy that was simple, flexible, and discipline agnostic, with mechanisms to ensure that students would always be incentivized to engage in all of their classes.
“The plot thickens for a hypothetical X17 particle”
Phys.org, November 2019
“With open data, scientists share their work”
Symmetry Magazine, August 2019
“CMS releases open data for Machine Learning”
CERN News, July 2019
“Scientists meet at Fermilab to discuss machine learning for jet physics”
Fermilab News, November 2018
“Lighting the way for dark matter”
PNAS, October 2017
“In the Dark about Dark Matter”
Scientific American, October 2016
Do we live in a universe where each discovery leads to deeper, more fundamental insights, or do we live in one where some parts have rhyme and reason, but others don’t?
“Has a Hungarian physics lab found a fifth force of nature?”
Nature, May 2016
“What Physicists Are Looking for Now That They’ve Found the Higgs Boson”
Bloomberg, April 2015
“How Three Guys With $10K and Decades-Old Data Almost Found the Higgs Boson First”
Wired Magazine, January 2015
Figuring out what happened in a collider is like trying to figure out what your dog ate at the park yesterday. You can find out, but you have to sort through a lot of shit to do it.
“‘Particle Fever’ documentary follows mystery of Higgs boson”
Portsmouth Herald, May 2014
“Connecting the visible universe with dark matter”
Symmetry Magazine, November 2013
“MIT’s Jesse Thaler Visits MHS”
Mustang News, October 2012
Here’s the universe, here’s pencil and paper, now go and find something new.
“Brainchild of MIT scientist is bound for space shuttle”
Boston Globe, August 2010
The scientific case for it, especially now, is fantastic.
Group Members in the News
Cari Cesarotti: “The Next Generation of Particle Experiments”
Sean Carroll’s Mindscape, September 2024
Cari Cesarotti: “Science 30 Under 30 (2024)”
Forbes, November 2023
Cari Cesarotti: “Particle Physicists Dream of a Muon Collider”
Scientific American, August 2023
Akshunna S. Dogra and Rikab Gambhir: “Can you hear the shape of physics?”
Imperial College News, July 2023
Lina Necib: “Astroparticle Physicist Wins 2023 Valley Prize for Work on Dark Matter”
APS News, October 2022
Cari Cesarotti: “With open data, scientists share their work”
Symmetry Magazine, August 2019
Radha Mastandrea: “A passionate advocate for open data”
MIT News, October 2018
Radha Mastandrea: “Paying it forward: Fellowship boosts women in physics”
MIT News, August 2018
Kevin Zhou: “Seeking new stories about the physical world”
MIT News, April 2017
Kevin Zhou: “Four MIT students named 2017 Marshall Scholars”
MIT News, November 2016
