Transcript of the Discovery Engines podcast episode "AI for Physics Discovery" with Jesse Thaler, hosted by Nabil Laoudji, released August 2025 (automatic captions; speaker changes marked with >>). Topics: Jesse's journey into physics, quantum field theory, the Large Hadron Collider, IAIFI, how AI accelerates physics and physics accelerates AI, many-worlds, and curiosity-driven research.
It's also affecting things conceptually 
>> and people are now starting to ask questions that you wouldn't really ask before because you didn't have the language to talk about it. 
>> and so let me take tell you one example from my own research. the standard model of particle physics the fundamental ingredients involve particles known as quarks. And quarks are the constituents of the proton. But you've never seen a quark in isolation. Quarks carry the strong nuclear force and the strong nuclear force is itself carried by the gluon. And so quarks and gluons are the fundamental ingredients of the standard model. And yet nothing in our collider data tells us about oh yes that's a quark that's a gluon. It's just coming from an inference process. 
>> But with the help of AI you can actually now study the properties of quarks and gluons kind of independent of the theory and then separately do a theory comparison. So instead of just having to infer directly onto quarks and gluons, you can kind of have this intermediate stage where you can study quarks and gluons in quotes, but without ever having to make any reference to quantum field theory and then check what the properties that you've inferred from that does indeed have the bridge that you'd like to the theory land. 
>> So it's a way of processing data in a way that can be more agnostic as to the underlying description. 
>> Again, I'm still a theoretical physicist. I still want to compare to the theoretical model, but there's a lot more that I can do within the data itself to tease out it structures with the help of AI. [Music] What if through advancing artificial intelligence, we could gain insights into some of the most fundamental unsolved questions in physics? And what if through advancing physics, we could unlock new ways to design and scale up super intelligent systems? Well, one person who sits squarely at the intersection of these two questions is Jesse Thaylor. He is a physicist at MIT's Center for Theoretical Physics and he's also the director of the National Science Foundation's Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions or IAIFI for short. I really enjoyed this conversation with Jesse. Not just because he's a fun and engaging person to chat with, as you'll soon see, but also because he's one of those few people who's equally comfortable chatting about the big questions like whether the multiverse as predicted by some interpretation of quantum mechanics is actually real. and some of the more day-to-day practical ones like how the research that physicists like himself and others are spearheading could lead to more efficient scaling of large AI systems. With that, join us for this wide ranging conversation. Let's go. All right, Jesse, welcome to Discovery Engines. 
>> Hey, thanks for having me. 
>> Absolutely. Great. 
>> Yeah. So, when I think about accelerating scientific discovery, physics is one of the areas I'm most excited about. first because of its practical applications and things like better sensors for navigation or opening up maybe new sources of energy with fusion energy and so forth. but also because of some of the I would say larger questions that it touches upon about the origins of the universe, the nature of reality and so forth. And so one reason I'm really excited to be chatting with you is that you have dedicated your career into really investigating these big questions and their practical applications. and I'm excited to dig into that with you today. 
>> Yeah. Great. Looking forward to the conversation. 
>> Great. So, let's start off with your CV or your background. So, you are professor of physics here at MIT Center for Theoretical Physics. you are also the director of the NSF's Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions called IAIFI. you have a PhD in physics from Harvard, a bachelor's of science from Brown in mathematical physics. Did I get that right? 
>> Yeah, that's correct. Okay, awesome. So, maybe just starting off from the beginning, what first sparked your interest in physics? 
>> Yeah. So, I didn't know about physics until I was in high school and like many high school juniors, I experienced physics for the first time. And I always knew that I was interested in mathematics and I loved the manipulations of mathematical equations. And then to learn that those same manipulations were actually relevant for understanding the physical world was really a revelation. And so in high school, I developed a love for physics. And so when I went to Brown for my undergraduate, I knew that I wanted to study mathematics and physics, but also take advantage of the liberal arts experience at Brown and also take, you know, classes in philosophy and history and such. And at the time at Brown, what I realized is that indeed the mathematical structure that I was learning about in my courses had a direct translation to the physical world that you had learned about linear algebra. And really that is the language of quantum mechanics. and I really wanted to dive in deeper and so when I decided to go for a PhD, I decided I really wanted to work in theoretical physics. I wanted to be using mathematics but in a way that was tied to reality as we were discussing. 
>> and little did I know that I would be starting a journey that would actually take me outside of the rarified mathematical realm and actually get me closer and closer and closer to reality as we see it in physics experiments. And so while I'm definitely trained still as a theoretical physicist I'm was trained to do pencil and paper calculations, chalk and chalkboard calculations. Increasingly the work that I do connects to data and it connects to computing and it connects to artificial intelligence which is of course one of the great transformational technologies of our time. 
>> Well very excited to dig into the AI aspect in particular. Maybe before we get there so you know the love started with math. It's you found this really interesting and practical application to to reality. What is it about the understanding of reality that that you know piqu your interest or that got you excited? so I was actually under a misconception when I was younger. I thought that through pure thought one could figure out how the universe worked. Certainly that's something that we're we're taught when thinking about some of the great minds in physics that you would do thought experiments or you would think about mathematical structures and those would reveal how the universe operated. the reality turns out to be more complicated than that. that you can have the best mathematical understanding of how things work and that just may not be the way that the universe decides to operate. and so over time actually my perception has changed that it started off by saying I want to use math to illuminate the way that the universe operates and now actually it's getting revealed information from the universe from experiments and then using theory insights to try to infer from that data that you collect in experiment what really the underlying theoretical description is. but it's changed from me thinking that pure thought was the path forward to really realizing that it's a dialogue between theory and experiment. And you need both. You need the experiments to actually collect the data to see the way that the universe works. But data by itself doesn't actually give you an underlying sense of how things operate. And theory is actually really essential to connect that data to underlying principles because in many cases those principles aren't directly revealed in the data. You have to infer their presence from the data that you collect combined with theoretical knowledge. 
>> Okay. Well, that's a great then segue into my next question which is you know your profile on your MIT website says you are a theoretical particle physicist who fuses techniques from quantum field theory and machine learning to address outstanding questions in fundamental physics. So for you know our audience here maybe who hasn't studied physics or maybe has been since that college or high school class let's maybe break those terms down. So, first starting off with a theoretical particle physicist. What is a theoretical particle physicist? 
>> Right. So, I'm a theorist. That means that I dream about the way that the universe could operate. but you don't want to get me anywhere near an experimental apparatus. that said, the work that I do has proposed new types of experiments. The work that I've done has influenced the way the data is analyzed. But the work that I do does not directly involve me, you know, plugging in, components, using screwdrivers, anything like that. You don't want to be anywhere near an experimental facility. U, so that's the theoretical side. the particle physics side is that we're trying to understand the fundamental constituents of nature, which to the best of our knowledge to date, really consists of particles, point-like objects. And it's kind of remarkable that all the phenomena that we see in nature at least to date seems to have a particle-like description. so right now this table here is illuminated by light. And we think that that light is carried by a photon which is a type of particle. even gravity there's a way to describe at least certain aspects of gravity as interactions of gravitons. And when I started off with my studies, I was hoping that actually this particle perspective would get overturned. And I was studying string theory as an alternative description that actually these pointlike particles maybe they'd be resolved into these more extended objects. To the best of our knowledge right now, we don't have any evidence for that directly. there's theoretical ideas that that push us towards thinking that strings might be more fundamental than particles. but all the experimental evidence that we have right now is pointing in this particle-like direction. And so the study of particles is really studying the fundamental structure of our universe as we perceive it today. 
>> H well so then the second part of your you know description on the website is you know mentions quantum field theory in particular QFT. So how does that relate to what you're describing? 
>> Yeah so quantum field theory is the mathematical description of particles 
>> and it's really quite remarkable. so quantum field theory does not tell you what particles exist but they tell you if I give you a bag of particles it can describe the interactions of those particles and make predictions but you do have to put as input what the fundamental particles of the universe are. 
>> so quantum field theory itself comes from quantum mechanics and ideas like entanglement or uncertainty that comes from quantum mechanics. It has special relativity in there that's the notion that space and time can transform into each other. you add on to that ideas of locality that interactions don't happen over long distances, they really happen locally. and you put that all together and out pops quantum field theory. And quantum field theory once you give me the list of particles in the universe is an incredibly powerful predictive framework for given a particle predicting what their implications are. The actual particle content that we know thus far is captured by the standard model of particle physics maybe not so creatively named which describes three of the four fundamental forces and the matter particles that interact with those forces and again they all have a particle-like description and then quantum field theory is the mathematical structure that you use to take those standard model ingredients and then turn them into theoretical predictions. 
>> I see. So staying at that level of complexity for my benefit and for our audiences follow-up question. So I noticed behind my back here there is somebody playing a guitar I think. 
>> and you know in my you know YouTube consumption and book consumption around quantum physics quantum mechanics and and QFT you know one of the things I've heard is you know there's this particle wave duality and maybe this goes back to your string theory work where in a sense you could think of these strings as as they're plucked in different ways give rise to different particles. Am I understanding that right or is that is that a 
>> that's a that's an over an overly simplistic view actually of what's going on and the reality is maybe more interesting but also more abstract. so and I'm I'm saying this as a particle physicist really everything is particles. it just happens to be that if you want to describe interactions of particles and you want to have particles scatter where they interact locally 
>> then you have to package those particles into fields 
>> and these fields are a packaging of a bunch of particles together and those fields have more wavelike properties. 
>> But when you're really looking at the quanta of the universe the quant of the universe they really are particles. It just happens to be that there's a way of also describing them in a wavelike manner. but I'm saying this again as a particle physicist. Other people might might might flip things around and say that the waves are more fundamental or the fields are more fundamental. But from the particle physicist perspective, there is a way of describing things entirely in terms of particles of which waves are kind of emergent from that. but it's different than what you were describing in terms of string theory. That's a that's a another direction that you might go of trying to understand what those particles themselves might be. but you don't need any kind of string-like perspective to understand this wave particle duality. 
>> I see. Well, you mentioned you know this important almost ying and yang between theory and experimental data and one of the most iconic places for that is CERN the Large Hadron Collider. again on your website you talk about your current research is focused on maximizing the discovery potential of the Large Hadron Collider through new theoretical frameworks and novel data analysis techniques. So maybe just starting off for folks unfamiliar with the Large Hydron Collider, the LHC, could you just share more about its history and why it's such an important you know device? 
>> Yeah, so the Large Hydrron Collider is a 27 km ring in Geneva, Switzerland at a facility called CERN which is really the focal point for particle physics research in Europe but really worldwide. And the large hydrron collider is a kind of a sequence of colliders leading up to it of everinccreasing intensity. That's the rate at which you're colliding particles but then also increasing energy. And the large hydron collider is the highest energy and the highest luminosity. That's the rate of collisions collider that we have in current operations. the LHC started taking data in 2010. famously it discovered the Higs bzon in 2012 which was really a crowning achievement. the discovery of the last missing particle in the standard model of particle physics and that's one of the reasons why the LHC is so important and the subsequent running of the LHC after the Higs Bzon discovery has been looking for cracks in the standard model to try to tell whether the interactions that we've already studied in the standard model whether they might be augmented by additional particles additional structures and very carefully on my website I talk about maximizing the discovery potential of the large hydrron collider cuz I don't know what nature holds for us. It may be that to the best of our knowledge and the best of our knowledge 10 years from now it will just be the standard model of particle physics or there could be new physics lurking in the data somewhere and new data analysis techniques are ways of taking the data from the LHC processing it in different ways and hopefully illuminating subtle features that might point us to new phenomena. 
>> Okay. So you mentioned, you know, the scale, the physical scale of the Large Hydron Collider. I went to a talk, actually, I believe it was at III, a couple of years ago where they just talked about the sheer amount of data that comes out of these collisions, and it was in the form of pabytes, which is a word I hadn't even run across before. Yeah. Could you give us a sense of just how much data is generated and how much of it we're able to analyze? 
>> Yeah. So one of the things about particle colliders which makes them different than other types of experiments is that it's a bit like the movie Groundhog's Day where the same thing happens over and over and over and over and over again. And so every collision at the LHC is set up to be to the best as we can do identical. So the identical collision energy, the identical particles coming in. and then what you're looking for is quantum effects that will give you different quantum probabilities for different things happening. So something like production of a Higs boson that's very rare. and then there's other types of things that happen which are copiously produced and we have to make decisions about what data is interesting and what data is less interesting because the actual data rate at the LHC is mind-bogglingly large such that even with the best computing infrastructure that we have we don't have the ability to write all that information to tape and when I say to tape I mean literally magnetic tape is actually used as one of the parts of the infrastructure at the LHC. So every 25 nanconds particles collide 25 nanconds. So 25 nanconds that's roughly the amount of time you have to make a decision about whether that event is an interesting collision event that might hold evidence for new phenomena or it's a boring collision event that might just be a garden variety type of collision at the LHC. and so you might imagine of course AI could be very useful if you're trying to make fast decisions. but you know each individual collision is not so big. each individual collision roughly is the amount of data that you would have in a kind of 10 megapixel camera image. So each image is not image is not so large. But 40 megahertz right or every 25 nonds that's how much you're coming out and you have to drop that down from 40 megahertz down to kind of hundreds of kilhertz in order to make it manageable to to do for offline analysis. and so it's not an experiment in the maybe the traditional way you think of it, an experiment where you get to change knobs and change conditions. Here, the conditions are always the same. 
>> The decision-m is whether you keep data or you don't keep data. And that's a daunting challenge. And there's always a worry that that keeps me up at night about whether we might be throwing out interesting physics because we don't have the right algorithms operating in real time to try to decide what collisions to keep. Hm. So are there you know runs that are scheduled over the course of a year and or or kind of has the has the experimental have the experiments been done and right now we're sifting through existing data. How is that being approached? 
>> Yeah. So it's a combination. So there is a a a plan over decades for when you run. so you try not to run during times when electricity costs are high. and there's actually two different modes of running. There's a mode of running where you're slamming together protons and that's relevant for particle physics. But there's also a mode of running where you're slamming together lead nuclei and that's relevant for nuclear physics. So roughly one month out of the year is spent on lead nucleus collisions. I think it's eight or nine months are spent on proton proton collisions. then there's time for you know repairs and things like that. and then there's longer stops that could take a year, two years, three years sometimes when you're doing major upgrades. but this is a multi-deade project. and there's a lot of negotiation about exactly when you're doing your runtime because you want to collect as much data as you as you possibly can. 
>> but you should be thinking about continuous when it's on. It's continuous collisions all the time every 25 nonds. but you also need to replenish the beam. And so there's a certain amount of running time where you've accelerated the beams up. You have them collide. As the collisions happen, the number of remaining protons decrease. At some point you dump the beam restart. So there's a a very complicated dance to try to collect as much of data as you possibly can at these at these colliders. 
>> Well, you mentioned the Higs Boson and you know the the standard model of particle physics. You know, one of the sort of things I've heard anecdotally from physicists is that that model is stubbornly accurate. And as you said, I think we're trying to find cracks within that model. There's also, you know, some other folks who say, well, maybe that's just all that we can get to with this amount of energy that we're able to to throw at these particles and accelerate them with. And so maybe the unlock is going to be in the next, you know, generation of particle accelerators. So yeah, could you share more about how how you think about that? Clearly, I mean, the benefit of the work that you're doing, and I want to get more into the AI aspect soon, is that, you know, the there might be there already. and there's a whole, you know, universe of work to be done in order to uncover, maybe the signal within the noise. 
>> certainly also seems a lot more cost- effective relative to building a big a big new facility. 
>> but yeah, how do you think about sort of some of those perspectives on this the state of of of new discovery? Yeah. So actually it's a complicated thing to negotiate and in fact before the large hydron collider there was a previous accelerator that was actually in the identical tunnel the large electron positron collider 
>> and before it was decommissioned there was actually potential evidence for the Higs bosen lurking in that data and it was an incredibly challenging decision to say you know what we're going to decommission that particular accelerator and build a higher energy collider the large hydron collider and once you gutted the tunnel you couldn't go back and so that's a complicated negotiation to say should we continue to collect data at the current machine or do you actually go and build a higher energy or higher luminosity machine to try to get a different type of data. and that is what our field is wrestling with right now or has been wrestling with. and we've made collectively a decision that we have are going to launch the high luminosity upgrade of the large hydrron collider 
>> and that upgrade had a very particular target in mind that given all the various technologies available one of the things that we'd really like to understand is understand a particular property of the higs bzon which I'll describe in a moment and it was decided as a community that the best way to get access to that information was indeed to run the LH HC but in this higher luminosity mode collect more data roughly spend another decade collecting data and that would be the best chance for us to understand this particular property of the Higs boson but it's a complicated decision because when you're doing that that means that you can't do something else and so again it's a collective decision of the community through a lot of strategic planning to make that decision 
>> but the reason why this particular property of the Hig Bzon was so important was that we know that the Higs Bzon is responsible for giving elementary particles their mass and the degree to which the Higs Bzon talks to various particles that's proportional to how much mass they have. So the heaviest particle in the standard model is the top quark and the top quark also has the strongest interactions with the Higs and we've measured the interactions of the Higs Bzon with top quarks with W Bzon Z bzons but we've never measured the interaction of the Higs Bzon with itself 
>> because the Higs Bzon itself has mass and therefore the Higs should sometimes give itself mass 
>> and that was the scientific target that was used to decide basically how much running to do 
>> and there's other science you can do besides that really big ticket item but that was the thing that drove the decision for roughly the next decade of having running in this mode of continuing the LHC 
>> and now the decision is well what do we do after the LHC what's the next collider that we build and we're part of a strategic planning exercise there's a version of it that happened in the United States that's called the snow mass process and I served on the panel called the particle physics project prioritization panel that made recommendations to the US government about how to prioritize activities in the US side of particle physics. Now there's a European strategy group that's meeting to try to decide things on the European side and they are deciding in some sense what is the next accelerator that you would build after the LHC and we're having these conversations of the trade-offs of different technologies, different time frames, what is the science that we want to uncover and those are really fun conversations to be to be had and hopefully we'll come to a community consensus about what the best path forward is. H well one thing that I find so I would say heartwarming and I'm sure it's different maybe under when you're actually at those conversations but from the outside you know when I think about just grand projects that we take across nations you know today you know the LHC really stands out as one that is you know financed as I understand it for multiple nations involves scientists from all over the world and you know by virtue of its the fact that you can only create one of these or for so many of these you need to engage in this collective decision-m with real tangible outputs and impacts on science and so forth. So I guess what what can we learn from from that process? that you know from the outside seems like an an inspired one. 
>> Yeah. 
>> well the particle physicists have had to do this out of necessity. not everyone can have their own accelerator. there was a time when everyone really could have their own accelerator and different universities would have their own private accelerator complex, but as you're going to higher collision energies and higher collision rates, you end up getting it to be cost prohibitive. And so the community out of necessity had to work collectively 
>> and examples where we didn't work as collectively and where we maybe didn't get consensus as a community as a whole. Those have been situations where particle physics hasn't done as well. And we've done our best science and engaged the most science has also engaged society at large most effectively when we've done these big community efforts where there are multiple different science outcomes that come from the same machine. and so the LHC is not really just one experiment. It's many many many different PH thesis that are generated from the LHC. And so you're really trying to build an apparatus that can serve a huge range of needs of the whole community. in terms of the lessons that we can learn elsewhere is that really in this era of big data and big science which seems to be necessary to push the frontiers of knowledge, you really do need to have that community thinking and the conversations that are happening now in the world of AI are ones that also drive us in that direction that if we really want to see coming from the academic side great advances happening in AI, we may also need to do that kind of collective action and think about building AI models that are actually community efforts as opposed to small author list work which is more typical in in this area. but particle physics offers a very interesting case of out of necessity having people get on the same page and make collective decisions. Well, I think there's, you know, really more than one interesting connection between physics and AI and in the way in which both, you know, you could say communities and in some cases there's it's the same folks who are physicists who are working at these AI companies are trained up through physics and then able to contribute that yeah contribute to the AI and the AI contributes to the physics. So, going to yeah, the other hat that you wear as director of the Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions 
>> and I'll use this opportunity to take a sip from the mug so you can see the logo here. could you could you share more about yeah the origin story of this organization and what its mission is? 
>> This actually goes back to 2016 when a number of my friends were using AI or starting to use AI for particle physics applications. So around that time you were seeing incredible advances in computer vision and so particle physicists were taking advantage of that to try to apply it to data analysis tasks at the LHC. And in 2016, I'm on the record, as making the following joke. You know, all the stuff going on in the world of deep learning, you know, why are my theory friends doing this? You know, we're in the business of deep thinking. 
>> And that was a joke that I made in 2016 quite dismissive of what was happening in the AI world. And if I'm really honest with myself, it was really that I was feeling threatened because a lot of the theoretical work that I was doing was being supplanted by AI advances such that I was developing new data analysis techniques, but AI was in some sense developing its own techniques that were direct competition with with my work. And indeed, my work is often used as a punching bag for AI benchmarks where you say, "How much can you beat Jesse's strategy?" So that's what was going on in 2016. And at that time that that fall two graduate students Eric Matiov and Patrick Kamitzky came into my office. They were you know new graduate students really excited about using AI and applying it to physics. And I was quite dismissive of the work that they were doing. And I was telling them all the things about their research program that didn't make sense from my theoretical perspective. 
>> And I thought I'd never see them again. I was kind of get off my lawn Kromagen style. but they actually continued to do their PhD work with me and they showed me the way that AI gives us new perspectives on problems in particle physics. And now there are things that I can't unsee. That is the way that machine learning and AI gives you a different lens on your problems are ones where I really see that as the future of how we do scientific investigations. 
>> So that started in 2016. I went on sabbatical. and that sabbatical a few years later really cemented my excitement about AI. And then coming back from sabbatical, there was a call from the National Science Foundation to launch new AI institutes. And so folks at MIT along with Harvard, Northeastern and TUS universities, we got together and put in a proposal that ultimately was funded with me as the director of this institute. And that joke that I had before about deep learning and and deep thinking, the tagline of III now is deep learning plus deep thinking equals a deeper understanding. 
>> both a deeper understanding of physical systems but also a deeper understanding of how AI itself works. 
>> and so people know or at least have some conception what what what deep learning is. This is this AI revolution. Deep thinking are all the things that I learned as a student in physics. the way that you analyze complex systems, break them down into the fundamental pieces. things like symmetries that we teach all MIT students about in their classes and you take those physics insights, you combine them with the AI revolution and indeed we have seen a deeper understanding coming out of our our institute. But it started off with me being very suspicious about AI and dismissive honestly. And then my perspective transformed and now I'm very much an evangelist for this toolbox of advances from mathematics, statistics and computer science kind of under this broad brella of AI and what the potential of that is for scientific advancement. 
>> Well, in a way spoken like a true scientist when given some data that you know opposed your viewpoint, you then updated accordingly. Okay. So I want to get into both of those parts. what AI is doing for physics and what physics is doing for AI. So maybe just starting with the first one, could you describe some interesting breakthrough or just novel approach that you've seen u where AI has really been leveraged to maybe help with looking through and sifting through that data from the LHC or or other experiments. 
>> Right? So we talked before about this synergy between experimental work and theoretical work. 
>> And the bridge between experiment and theory is known as inference. So inference is a process of given data to try to as best as you can figure out what the underlying theoretical description is. 
>> And what AI has done is allowed us to do much more sophisticated inference techniques that can take maximal benefit from the data that we've collected and apply it in much more sophisticated ways to to to theory. and so when I was a graduate student, what you would see is you would see plots coming out of colliders. Despite the fact you have this massive amount of data, all the data was kind of compressed onto a histogram. One dimension, you make some plot, you see some bump, you declare victory. But one dimension, this massive highdimensional data set being projected down just to one dimension. 
>> With AI, you can really work with that entire highdimensional feature space. all the in intricate information from that collision debris and use that to do inference. And so you know it whether you would call it machine learning or AI at the time certainly the discovery of the Higs boson was aided by various AI style techniques and arguably we discovered the Hig boson faster than people thought because you're taking advantage of AI's ability to find those complicated patterns. but now more recently you're now seeing heroic analyses where you can do this theory experiment comparison in ways that are way more sophisticated because you have this ability to well even though we as humans can't visualize that highdimensional spaces the AI can and it can make decisions about what is or is not most likely in the universe based on this full highdimensional space. So that's one of the ways that the AI in a very concrete way is is is affecting particle physics, 
>> but it's also affecting things conceptually 
>> and people are now starting to ask questions that you wouldn't really ask before because you didn't have the language to talk about it. 
>> and so let me take tell you one example from my own research. the standard model of particle physics, the fundamental ingredients involve particles known as quarks. And quarks are the constituents of the proton. But you've never seen a quark in isolation. 
>> Quarks carry the strong nuclear force. And the strong nuclear force is itself carried by the gluon. And so quarks and gluons are the fundamental ingredients of the standard model. And yet nothing in our collider data tells us about oh yes that's a quark, that's a gluon. It's just coming from an inference process. But with the help of AI, you can actually now study the properties of quarks and gluons kind of independent of the theory and then separately do a theory comparison. So instead of just having to infer directly onto quarks and gluons, you can kind of have this intermediate stage where you can study quarks and gluons in quotes, but without ever having to make any reference to quantum field theory and then check what the properties that you've inferred from that does indeed have the bridge that you'd like to the theory land. So it's a way of processing data in a way that can be more agnostic as to the underlying description. Again, I'm still a theoretical physicist. I still want to compare to the theoretical model, but there's a lot more that I can do within the data itself to tease out the structures with the help of AI. 
>> In a previous episode of this podcast, I interviewed an investigator at the ARK Institute. it's a funded organization that does really interesting work in building foundation models for biology. and they, you know, build the, you know, self-proclaimed largest ever model in biology, EVO 2, released it a couple couple of months ago. And in talking with them, they had a partnership with Nvidia, also Greg Brockman, co-founder of OpenAI, helped out with the team. And one of the things that I learned is, you know, in getting this model to be developed and to work, there was almost just as much effort in the structural engineering of being able to, for example, take this many, you know, GPUs and make them work together to be able to do training on these models in order for them to yeah, I guess be able to break down a model into its component parts and still train it as a whole model. and you know having open AI's for example expertise in that was really valuable to to the ARC Institute. I'm wondering you know as you've seen the application of AI for physics you talked about you know the pabytes exabytes of data coming out of the LHC you know needing to put that onto magnetic tape just because of the the volume of data. How much of the challenge is around you know coming up with interesting new algorithms that are more useful and clever versus just the the engineering of you know building the right you know size you know cloud computation facility in order to make this work happen 
>> right so so there there's kind of two different aspects of it one aspect of it is indeed the infrastructure aspect 
>> but in particle physics where we're operating is so far different than what's happening in the more commercial realm that we are leading the way in developing the AI toolbox because we need things that are faster and more robust than anything that's really needed in an industry context. 
>> So there's an effort in fast machine learning where you're trying to make machine learning that can operate at this trigger decision level at the LHC to try to decide whether or not to keep events and that's something where we are at the forefront that that we are developing techniques that are now applicable elsewhere. the other aspect which is I think the we don't really know which way it's going to go is this some sense the tension between deep learning and deep thinking 
>> that there is certainly advances that are happening by just throwing a lot of GPUs at the problem. and I'm I'm always shocked how much things or how well things scale by just putting more compute at the problem or more data at the problem how things improve. But there's also like the deep thinking part that embedding your physics knowledge into the AI. And that's an interesting type of trade-off because if you're doing things on the more compute end of the spectrum, yes, you can benefit from industry advances. If you're building custom AI tools that have physics knowledge built in, that's harder to benefit from industry advances, but then you are kind of guaranteed that you have the physics knowledge in your AI architecture. And I think that's where it becomes a very interesting trade-off. And I think we're still deciding to what extent is domain knowledge relevant or not. 
>> and it probably really will depend ultimately on the quality and the availability of the data to see which kind of technique wins out. 
>> But a lot of the work that I do it even runs on laptops. You don't actually need super fancy you know big GPU infrastructure. and it and and yet it's still impactful. and that's an interesting thing that happens when you actually do bake in physics knowledge that oftentimes you can have the training be more efficient than you would if you didn't have that physics knowledge to begin with. 
>> Well, I think that's really exciting. Also, just from, you know, I went to the Sloan school here at MIT and always thinking through things on on the business end of things and as you are in a way from a one of the things we talk about is extreme users in different areas as you're an extreme user of data and sensors and so forth. some of the breakthroughs that you need to have in order to be able to do your work I imagine have really interesting applications whether they're top of mind right now or going to be top of mind in the next few years right you talk about making quick decisions well I think about you know robotics that have embedded AI systems that themselves need to make quick decisions with data that comes in you know what parallels are there there so yeah how how do you think about that 
>> so no the work that I do is curiosity driven And I certainly am not doing my research with an idea about how it might be used elsewhere, but it is pretty remarkable how techniques that you develop with a particular physics context in mind end up being relevant in other applications. and one way of thinking about it is that for us we have to develop a technology otherwise what we do doesn't work at all. Whereas in other contexts there's a trade-off and there may be multiple technologies that you're deciding between. But if you if someone give you as a gift something coming from the curiositydriven realm and said hey here's this new technique then of course you would adopt it. And that's what we've seen with various technologies that have been developed in in particle physics independent of AI and now we're starting to see it more with AI in particular with fast machine learning where fast machine learning is is relevant to a variety of disciplines obviously not just in physics. Now, we happen to have the most extreme needs on time, but you can scale those things back and and of course it's relevant beyond there. and it and ends up being an interesting question. If you knew ahead of time that your goal was to develop that that technology, would you nevertheless still want to fund the curiosity driven research to make that happen? And I I I I don't know the answer but I am always always amazed about some of the practical applications of the work that we do in physics that can be quite different from what our intended original application was. 
>> Mhm. Well, you know, in chatting with folks who have chatted themselves or worked at some of the big labs, Allah Anthropic and OpenAI and so forth, I think one of the things that they really value in the perspective that physicists bring to their teams is one, they often don't trust the data and they're very good yeah very good at taking that first level of analysis. I think the second is there's so much emphasis now on interpretability or explanability of these black block black box models and for me you know the analogy of you know the data that's coming out of of a collision where you're trying to understand the multi-dimensionality of it and create kind of frameworks and models that might map on to the real world that seems to be an obvious parallel a third that I've heard about is just the interesting parallels and maybe inspiration from diffusion in thermodynamics that then has been the backbone of a lot of these image generation, video generation models that are kind of all all the rage these days. So to me, some of those kind of the way in which physics is now informing AI, 
>> there's already evidence of that, which I think is really exciting. 
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean, diffusion models are a really great example of why is it that a physical process that in some sense scrambles information, why should that be really good at generating images? And of course, it's not actually diffusion in the forward direction. is actually reverse diffusion is what we're using to generate images. and there's been work at our our AI institute of trying to understand more generally what types of physical processes are good for generating images more generally. 
>> and it turns out that for example some of the equations that we teach our first year students in electricity and magnetism, some of those equations are also very good at generating images which may not be so so obvious. but there definitely is this interesting perspective that physicists bring to problems and one aspect of it is that we need to understand both why something works but we also need to understand ways that we can break it 
>> and when you're doing empirical studies you know a lot of the studies of AI are being driven by just doing experiments not experiments in the physics sense but experiments in the in the AI sense And physicists are very good at exploring the whole space of possibilities to make sure you understand when things do work, when when things don't work. And instead of being content with seeing one example and trying to draw a conclusion from that one example, physicists often want to explore because we have experience with physical systems that physical systems often exhibit exotic phases. And so just like you know water can be in liquid form or in ice form as solid or or gaseous form as vapor we also have evidence that AI systems also exhibit different types of phases and that's something that physicists is very natural to think about in that language. and so that's really good to explore kind of different behaviors of AI systems by thinking about them almost like physical systems that you can poke and prod. 
>> So there's a lot of investment being done right now in AI on the commercial end. in academia itself at MIT we've got this new Schwarzman Institute of Computing and at Seesale and and so forth as you look out into the next 5 10 years in the way in which AI can help advance physics like what are you most excited about? 
>> Yeah, so I had a a transition as I mentioned when I saw that AI could could influence data analysis and you know that transition happened from 2016 to 2020. and 2020 is when our AI institute launched. two years later you had chat GBT come out and again I found myself in this more chromogyny mode of saying oh what are these large language models I would ask chat GBT at the time questions about particle physics which it gave beautiful but hallucinated incorrect answers to and that's something that I've also started to change my mind about and change my mind about in two ways one is realizing that data is more than just numbers or equations that also text is a type of data 
>> and realizing that a lot of what we do already in particle physics is we write papers and emails and such to each other like that's how we communicate and realizing that that that's actually a very rich way of communication and so now as you're starting to see these large language models evolve to really become reasoning engines or even kind of a you're starting to see this capability for interacting with humans in a new way 
>> and you're hearing People talk about wanting to build an AI physicist as a type of a digital collaborator and this is something that doesn't seem so far-fetched to me and it may be that in the next 5 to 10 years indeed you will be you know right now I couldn't live without Mathematica which is a program for symbolic manipulation and it may be that in 5 to 10 years I won't be able to live without a system that can do kind of conceptual manipulation with me and that seems more on the horizon now than than than I might have anticipated back in 2022. 
>> So, that's one thing that I'm I'm hoping for over the next 5 to 10 years. The other thing that I'm really hoping for in the next 5 to 10 years is that physicists will help come up with a way of breaking through some of these scaling behaviors that we're seeing with AI systems. So, it is known that if you take an AI system and you make it bigger and bigger and bigger and you add more and more data that it gets better performance. But it doesn't get better performance in a way that's linear with the amount of of of resources you're throwing at it. It only grows slower. It grows logarithmically. 
>> And okay, for commercial applications, maybe you can throw that type of money at the problem. But if you're trying to do curiositydriven research, we really can't afford to do that type of scaling. And so my hope is that someone from the physics community or for the science community more broadly might come up with ways to actually have more favorable scaling that as you're putting more resources in you get you know comparably more more output coming out. And there's an interesting historical example of this that happened in particle physics when you had a transition in technology from old style accelerators to new style colliders where you had a change in the technology that changed the scaling behavior. So accelerators, you pay a certain amount of money to get beams to a certain energy. And what you would do with those beams is you basically throw them into a brick wall. And the total amount of effective energy that you get if you put a certain amount of energy in, you only get a square root of that energy out in terms of the effective collision energy. And so the the technology of the collider allowed you to take the full energy that you're putting in by having colliding beams. So that the full energy is going into the collision process. And that change in technology, that change in scaling behavior led to similar change in our ability to make discoveries. And so one would hope that maybe we can come up with AI systems that have more favorable scaling behaviors such that as you're putting more resources to it, you actually get more out and that we're and it may be that physicists could be have the the best background for maybe coming up with that new type of scaling behavior that could actually make AI even more powerful that is right now for the same amount of resources. 
>> Wow. So real impacts to being able to push physics forward, but also just to as we think about the incredible infrastructure needs that we need to build out nationally in terms of energy and storage and so forth. you know, reducing the needs for that or being able to get more bang for a buck. 
>> That that would be incredible and with with with broad applications. Yes. 
>> So that's that's something that I'm hoping for might happen in in in the coming decade. 
>> Okay. Well, I as you know a science nerd and a burgeoning physics or a nent physics nerd you know have read some books on popular physics and interpretations and so forth. So there's a few theories that I wanted to throw at you in a quick popcorn style and just get your quick take on them. Okay. 
>> All right. so Einstein in a 1955 letter of condolence to the family of his long lifelong friend Michael Besso wrote the distinction between past, present and future is only a stubbornly persistent illusion. Quick take. So something that does seem to be fundamental is causality. and while time itself is something that can be manipulated and twisted around, it does seem like yes the past does influence the future and not the other way around. 
>> But indeed when you look at the equations of fundamental physics time is this malleable thing and while causality seems to be preserved exactly the notion of time orderings is is something that is indeed flexible as Einstein said. Donald Hoffman, professor of cognitive science at UC Irvine. he wrote a book that I read a few years ago. He talks about the essentially interface theory of perception. This idea that through evolution we essentially solve not for being able to see the world well but being able to survive. And so ultimately he talks about reality being this interface. And he says famously spacetime is doomed. It's not real. It's an interface that we impose on reality. Thoughts on that? Yeah. So, quantum field theory, the mathematical framework that I work on really takes spaceime as the tapestry on which everything happens. but we know that eventually, if you get enough or or extreme enough gravity that indeed the the structures of quantum field theory start to break down. And while there is a notion of quantum gravity that works for a while, you can talk about gravity in terms of gravitons for a little while, eventually you get a black hole or eventually you get the big bang start of the universe. and the notion of spacetime completely collapses. And so indeed the fundamental description of the universe will probably have spaceime as being an emergent property. but for the work that I'm doing at the LHC, spacetime is the tapestry on which everything everything else is painted. Awesome. so in popular fiction and it's almost become sort of you know slang talking about you know I'm glad that I'm in or I'm not glad that I'm in you know this what's it called like branch of the universe or this reality right it's become a meme in a lot of cartoons you know when I dig into that there's essentially a lot of it has to do with quantum mechanics there's a Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics which states that let's see upon measurement of an observer a wave function collapses into a single definite I think Hugh Everett's theory of the universal wave function says that each branch of this superp position is equally real and we exist within each of them. Your take Jesse. 
>> So maybe just to say where this is coming from. the challenging thing about quantum systems is that you also have to tell take into account the quantumness of the observer and you can't separate you yourself as an observer from the quantum system that you're trying to study. And this makes it really complicated to describe. one way of describing it is with the collapse the wave function. The other way of describing it is with the many worlds interpretation. mathematically you get the same answer. but I would say that philosophically what I like about the many worlds perspective is that it preserves the notion of probability. And I'm not sure that I would say that each branch of the universe has the same notion of reality, but it has certainly a notion of probability in the same way that if your favorite sports team loses, there was a branch of probability in which they won the game. There was some betting odds that they won. Yes, that's maybe not the the the universe that you're occupying, but it's not as if the fact that you observed the system to be in one state doesn't mean that there wasn't a reality of the possibility that your team might win. And similarly the fact that you've observed something didn't doesn't change the fact that there really was a quantum probability for you to have seen something else. And in that sense I like the the the Everton type of approach to things because it preserves that notion of probability and and and and and probability seems to be kind of fundamental to their description of the universe. 
>> Okay. So if your favorite sports team did lose, you can't necessarily take solless in the fact that they are winning in a different universe. They might just have lost. they might just have lost and yet you you might have been perfectly justified in in placing your money on that that that team. Yes. 
>> Great. last one which relates to our conversation of in AI Demis Hassabis the founder of deep mind on his Twitter I believe since last time I checked he says you know seeking to understand the fundamental nature of reality or of the universe and he's also said you know if we solve intelligence then when you can then we can use that intelligence to solve everything else and by everything else he means a lot of deep scientific questions clearly he's been all in on this but yeah your perspective on that 
>> yeah So first of all, it's an incredible idea that if you could take aspects of human intelligence and really scale it up with computers, you think about what human minds have been able to do over the centuries and and really have that kind of amazing growth if we can scale it up. I think my my perspective is is one the challenges that we're facing are probably ones where intelligence alone is not going to be enough and or at least human intelligence style alone will not be enough and actually one of the things that computers are able to do is go allow us to transcend beyond human intelligence and even come up with new types of intelligence or at least new ways of processing or parsing data. so while it's very seductive to think that, oh, all I need to do is build an intelligence system in the human style of intelligence and unleash it, actually my my sense is that we're going to see that there's multiple different types of intelligence good for different types of problems. And there are probably still problems for which brute force search with the computer algorithm that might be the best path forward and that the kind of human intuition may not actually be relevant for all scientific problems. And so more generally I'm enthusiastic about computing mathematics statistics as an engine that drives things of which intelligence apparently seems to be subsumed under that brella remarkably to me under the banner of AI. but it may be that even more traditional computational strategies will be equally important and we should not seek intelligence by itself without also pushing on the frontiers of computing more generally. 
>> Once again we get to that ying and the yang. 
>> Ying and the yang. Yes. That's right. Fascinating. Yeah, 
>> great. Well, Jesse, for folks who want to help, contribute, partner with IAIFI or the work that you're doing here at MIT or any of your other projects, what's the best way for them to help out? 
>> Oh, so you can of course go to ifi.org and and find about the work that we're doing. but I guess there's there's three things that I would ask of your your viewers. So, one is that if you're in a position to advocate for curiositydriven research, please do so. that the type of research that we're doing this more fundamental research we don't always know where it's going but at least historically we've seen that it's had transformational impact and AI plus physics seems to be this new area that with support from foundations support from the federal government support from private individuals can really blossom and I think that curiositydriven research is a really powerful engine going forward the second is that if you're in a position to hire people people working at this intersection of AI plus physics they're incredibly talent Ed they see the world through this multifaceted way and even if your problem doesn't seem to be one that's physics specific if it involves a type of data analysis or just deep thinking about the way that a problem could be solved then the people who are coming out of our AI institute or more generally in AI plus physics please hire them because they're spectacularly talented hire them of course in academic circles in national lab circles but also in industry contexts and then the last thing that I would say and this is something that I heard at an MIT education forum is please don't be an ostrich. AI is quite scary in terms of its way to transform society. It's also quite exciting. but don't sit on the sidelines. Don't pretend like it's going to go away and engage with it in whatever way makes sense to to to you. if you haven't actually played around with one of these large language models, spend some time working with it. Try to understand what it can or cannot do. but definitely don't ignore it. because it's poised to change scientific research. It's poised to change education. It's poised to change society. And the more you can learn about that, the more informed you are about its capabilities, the more that you as a citizen can make informed decisions about what things to support or not. 
>> Well, thank you for that. U Jesse, just personally, I've really enjoyed this conversation. and I just really appreciate the work you're doing both on the practical end of developing, you know, the US workforce and our next generation of AI specialists and physics specialists to also helping just advance humanity's knowledge of some of these large questions that I think you know sparked our interest back in that high school science class and that we want to see continue to evolve and make sense of. So really appreciate your efforts and this conversation. Oh, thank you miss so much, Nil. And thanks to all of of your listeners and viewers as well. hopefully they found what I talked about to be interesting and hopefully they'll find ways to incorporate AI into whatever they're doing in their lives. 
>> Okay. Thank you so much. 
>> Thanks so much. 
>> All right. Well, thank you for joining this episode of Discovery Engines. I'll link below in this podcast episode links to II and MIT Center for Theoretical Physics. if you want to get more updates, join our newsletter at discovery engines.co. Thank you. Hey, [Music]
